Areas of application for SSDs

The elimination of the sensitive motor mount and read/write mechanics of drives with rotating platters results in increased shock resistance. The temperature tolerance is also greater. This concerns both the temperature range in which SSDs can be operated and the tolerance with regard to temperature changes. Both points qualify SSDs for mobile use. Flash-based SSDs are therefore most often found in MP3 players and USB sticks. Due to the meanwhile significantly lower price per GB, they are now also common in notebooks. Another advantage is the constant, very low latency in accessing the stored data compared to rotating disks. While accessing data in physically distant sectors on a hard disk requires a relatively long time to move the read head to the new position (similar to a record player), on an SSD the information contained can be read or written via the address of a data block regardless of the previously relevant block. In addition, in contrast to hard disks, the sequential transfer rates do not decrease when the form factor is reduced (in the case of hard disks, the outer tracks have a larger circumference, which means there is more space for data there, and therefore more data can be read per revolution). Hybrid hard disks and pure SSD models have been on the market since 2007. 

SDRAM-based SSDs are more likely to be found in stationary use, and mostly far away from the mass market. They are used in applications that are very drive-heavy (databases, sorting applications) by repeatedly requesting small amounts of data from various storage areas. Often these drives are also used by developers and testers to measure the performance of hard disk controllers and buses, as they utilize them to the maximum. Their history began in 1978, when the company StorageTek launched the "Solid State Disk STK 4305", which was compatible with the IBM 2305 hard disk storage and was used with System/370 mainframes. StorageTek itself uses the term "Solid-State Disk". 

With the increasing performance of flash SSDs and better controllers, a comparably fast drive based on NAND was available for the first time in 2008. It was offered as a PCIe x4 card in favor of fast system connectivity, which is why it could not be used as a drive for the operating system, though, since the system has to boot first to be able to address the "fusion io" via a driver. That and the price of 50 Euros per gigabyte made it uninteresting for the end customer market, but represented a favorable offer for RamSan-level performance in the above mentioned field of application at the time.

In 2015, storage capacities of up to around 10 TB were offered, the form factor for these models is PCIe2.0 x16.

However, solid-state drives are also frequently used in the field of [disk cloning](https://backupchain.com/i/disk-cloning), [backup software](https://backupchain.com/en/backupchain/), and embedded systems, where it is exclusively a matter of dispensing with mechanical parts. A single-chip microcontroller application often has no hard disk connection for space and energy reasons; instead, its control program or operating system usually resides in a flash chip. Every PC also has such a chip; it contains the firmware (such as EFI or BIOS). 

Other areas of application are found in environments where dirt, vibrations as well as pressure fluctuations, temperature and magnetic fields (space travel) prevent the use of mechanical disks. 


Advantages and disadvantages of SSDs

The following is a comparison of the theoretical advantages with the practical ones. 

- Flash usage: HHDs (hybrid hard disks) first collect 32 MB of data during writing before the spindle motor starts. Once again, this much is made available to the programs that can be started via special keys on some keyboards. The remaining area is available for the most used data.

"Turbo Memory" is instead first activated by a driver that has to be installed later, which isn't included in Windows Vista. One half of the flash module then functions like that of a HHD, the other is used like a fast swap memory (see ReadyBoost). This effectively speeds up PCs with 1 GB RAM to the level of a 2 GB configuration, but it can't be turned off if this is already present. Thus, without a swap requirement, half of the module remains unused.

- Battery runtime: To actually save energy, both concepts require manual intervention. Since a conventional hard drive is used in "Turbo Memory", it is shut down by the Windows power options, not by a HHD drive controller. However, their default setting provides for a delay of several minutes instead of seconds after a hard disk access. If the setting is corrected to "3 minutes", the battery runtime is extended by 15%, for example from three to three and a half hours. A comparable effect is also seen in HHDs when the setting "Windows Hybrid Hard Drive Energy Saving Mode" is enabled in the energy options. (See also: Green IT)

- Speed gain: Many benchmarks cannot reflect the hybrid's additional performance in principle - because they use as many, different and large files as possible to generate a maximum load. These then exceed the capacity of the buffer many times over. In addition, they precisely do not use a recurring access pattern to rule out a drive manufacturer optimizing their product for this. However, this means that many available performance tests do not do justice to typical notebook use, and HHDs and "Turbo Memory" - similar to a hybrid car under full load - do not have an advantage in these tests. The former accelerates Windows startup and shutdown by around 20 percent - similar to the startup of frequently used programs.

"Turbo Memory", however, does not cause any acceleration according to initial tests by AnandTech.com. The notebook manufacturers Sony and Dell came to the same results and therefore do without this technology for the time being. AnandTech investigated this together with Intel and actually found the performance doubling promised by the manufacturer in the "PCMark" test. However, there were no speed advantages outside of the benchmark, neither during normal work nor during Windows startup or shutdown.

Even though hybrid hard disks only came onto the market in 2007, a similar technology already existed more than ten years earlier: The manufacturer Quantum had a SCSI hard disk series called "Rushmore" in its product range. This combined a conventional hard disk with drive-sized SD RAM instead of - at that time rather slowing down - flash. This ranged from 130 megabytes to 3.2 gigabytes when the series was discontinued in 2000. All stored data was supplied from the extremely fast "cache" during operation. However, since this was dependent on electricity, the manufacturer equipped the product with batteries against data loss. Their energy let the hard disk start in an emergency and take over all data from the RAM. Due to the high prices for RAM chips, however, the Rushmore disks were practically unaffordable for private users - they were a thousand times higher than today's flash chips. Therefore, the optionally available basic version was no exception: It lacked the hard disk and battery components, which were relatively cheap anyway. 


